
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# grassmapr

The `grassmapr` package has two related objectives: (i) to predict the
spatial distribution of terrestrial C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub>
grass cover â€“ using input climate layers and crossover temperature -
and (ii) to model plant stable carbon (\(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C)
*isoscapes* by applying isotopic endmembers to plant functional type
cover layers. The user may optionally include other (i.e., non-grass)
vegetation layers (e.g., % woody cover, % crop, etc.).

## Background

The primary driver of \(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C spatial variation in
terrestrial plant tissue is the greater isotopic fractionation in
C<sub>3</sub> plants compared to C<sub>4</sub> plants. The
physiologically based crossover temperature model explains the turnover
from C<sub>3</sub> to C<sub>4</sub> plants along gradients of
temperature (Ehleringer et al. 1997, Collatz et al. 1998, Still et
al. 2003).

The `grassmapr` package combines the crossover temperature model with
gridded climate and land-cover data to predict the relative abundance of
C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> vegetation distribution. Isotopic
endmember values are then applied to map plant \(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C,
resulting in a spatially continuous representation, or isoscape. These
layers are useful for understanding grass biogeography (e.g., Powell et
al.  2012, Griffith et al. 2015) and for studies seeking to identify the
movement of animals (e.g., Hobson 1999, Bowen & West 2008).

Note that \(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C also varies with photosynthetic
subtype in C<sub>4</sub> plants and with rainfall and water availability
in woody C<sub>3</sub> plants (Cerling & Harris 1999, Diefendorf et
al. 2010, Kohn 2010). Currently, `grassmapr` functions neglect these
secondary sources of spatial variation.

## Installation

The `grassmapr` package is hosted on GitHub. You can install the latest
released version using `devtools`<sup>1</sup>:

``` r
install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github(repo = "rebeccalpowell/grassmapr")
```

## Example usage

For a detailed guide to using `grassmapr`, see the vignette included
with package installation. Examples of commented scripts are provided in
the main-level folder. Data included in these examples are installed
with the `grassmapr` package.

## License

The `grassmapr` package is free and open source software; you may
redistribute and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
License, version 3, as published by the Free Software Foundation.

This package is distributed without any warranty, without even the
implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
See the GNU General Public License for more details.

A copy of the GNU General Public License, version 3, is available at
<https://www.r-project.org/Licenses/GPL-3>

## Citation

To cite package `grassmapr` in publications, use:

Powell, R. L. et al. 2019. grassmapr, an R package to predict
C<sub>3</sub>/C<sub>4</sub> grass distributions and model terrestrial
\(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C isoscapes.
<https://github.com/rebeccalpowell/grassmapr>

## References

Bowen, G. J. and West, J. B. 2008. Isotope landscapes for terrestrial
migration research. â€“ In: Hobson, K. A. and Wassenaar, L. I. (eds.),
Tracking Animal Migration with Stable Isotopes. Academic, pp. 79-105.

Cerling, T. E. and Harris, J. M. 1999. Carbon isotope fractionation
between diet and bioapatite in ungulate mammals and implications for
ecological and paleoecological studies. â€“ Oecologia 120: 347-363.

Collatz, G. J. et al. 1998. Effects of climate and atmospheric
CO<sub>2</sub> partial pressure on the global distribution of
C<sub>4</sub> grasses: present, past, and future. â€“ Oecologia 114:
441-454.

Diefendorf, A. F. et al. 2010. Global patterns in leaf
\(\delta\)<sup>13</sup>C discrimination and implications for studies of
past and future climate. â€“ Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107: 5738â€“43.

Ehleringer, J. R. et al. 1997. C<sub>4</sub> photosynthesis, atmospheric
CO<sub>2</sub>, and climate. â€“ Oecologia 112: 285-299.

Griffith, D. M. et al. 2015. Biogeographically distinct controls on
C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> grass distributions: merging community
and physiological ecology. â€“ Global Ecol. Biogeogr. 24: 304-313.

Hobson, K. A. 1999. Tracing origins and migration of wildlife using
stable isotopes: a review. â€“ Oecologia 120: 314-326.

Kohn, Matthew J. 2010. Carbon isotope compositions of terrestrial
C<sub>3</sub> plants as indicators of (paleo) ecology and (paleo)
climate. â€“ Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107: 19691â€“19695.

Powell, R. L. et al. 2012. Vegetation and soil carbon-13 isoscapes for
South America: integrating remote sensing and ecosystem isotope
measurements. â€“ Ecosphere 3: 109.

Still, C. J. et al. 2003. Global distribution of C<sub>3</sub> and
C<sub>4</sub> vegetation: carbon cycle implications. â€“ Global
Biogeochem. Cycles 17: 1006.

-----

<sup>1</sup> Package `devtools` is available from GitHub:
<https://github.com/r-lib/devtools>, or from CRAN:
<https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/devtools/index.html>
